Abstract. This article analyses the gang policies of the first years of the administration in El Salvador, from June 1009 until July 2011. Using securitisatheory, it explains why the administration returned to an emphasis on extraordmeasures, most of them repressive, to deal with gangs. It argues that these mewere the product of an ongoing and dynamic process in which the governmentbut one of the players in a complex field constituted by numerous actors. The rto repressive measures as well as the support and facilitation of a 'gang truce' wethe result of a rational design or a predetermined agenda, but should be seen as aof moves in a political conjuncture, in which the Salvadorean government needcommunicate to different audiences messages of being in control.
Keywords: El Salvador, gangs, gang violence, government policies, securitisaFunes government, gang truce


Introduction
Years after the region's civil wars ended, Central America continues to have
extremely high levels of social violence. The phenomenon causing most fear
and demanding most attention from the regional governments, the media and
the general public is that of street gangs, especially in Guatemala, Honduras
and El Salvador. The usual response of authorities to insecurity in these
countries has been to resort to repressive measures, including deployment of

the military and toughening of legislation.1 In the same trend, the policies
directed at the gangs have mostly been highly mediatised, zero-tolerance
measures, labelled mano-durismo approaches. Under these approaches the
military has assumed public security tasks and special anti-gang legislation has
been adopted.2 These policies are rarely complemented by more preventive
measures and do not appear to be successful, as gang membership and levels of
gang-related violence continue to rise.3


The main critique of the mano-durismo ('hard-handed') approaches to
public security is that they do not take into account underlying causes of the
gang problem, and that repression by itself cannot solve the problem.4
This critique was shared by the new centre-left government in El Salvador,
which took office in June 2009 and sought to reverse the mano-durismo
approaches of the previous governments. This proved extremely difficult,
however, and the new government soon resorted to reintroducing policies
that were associated with mano-durismo. In November 2.009, half a year after
taking office, President Mauricio Funes decided to expand the role of the
Salvadorean military and send them (back) to the streets. In May 2010, the
military assumed the role of guarding the perimeters of and access to several
prisons. In June 2010, after a horrific attack by a local gang on a microbus in
San Salvador, a new anti-gang law was announced, which was approved in
September. One year later, in June 2011, the president even proposed to draft
into the military at-risk youth, ages 16 to 18.5 However, at the end of 2011 and
the beginning of 2012, a novel two-pronged approach surfaced: retired military
officers were appointed minister of justice and public security and director of
the Policia Nacional Civil (National Civil Police, PNC), and a truce (tregua)
was signed between the main gangs. The result was a considerable reduction in
Chris van der Borgh and Wim Savenije 151
violence, but the legitimacy of the truce was hotly debated in Salvadorean
society.
This article focuses on the gang policies in the first three years of the
Funes administration, from June 2009 until July 2011. It seeks to explain
why and how the administration applied extraordinary measures to deal
with gangs. Although virtually all sectors in society see the phenomenon of
street gangs as a problem that needs to be addressed, there are important
differences in the interpretation and representation of the problem, as well
as in views about the most appropriate policies to address it. For instance,
public speech and discussions depict gang members variously as immoral
scum, as criminals or even as terrorists. However, these labels are challenged
(in subtle ways) by civil society organisations that emphasise that gangs are
also a product of a lack of opportunities for youth and of social exclusion.
Debates about the 'right' policy to address the gang problem have become
important and highly publicised fields of political contestation. A key issue in
these debates is the penchant of politicians to appear 'tough' on gangs
and their predominant concern with being accused of being too soft.6
Using securitisation theory, we aim to gain a better understanding of the
forces, dynamics and logics behind these recent twists in the policies directed
at street gangs, or pandillas, in El Salvador. In particular, we argue that, in
order to understand these changes in security policies, it is important
to understand how the technical, political and symbolic dimensions of
policy measures are used strategically by governments. Moreover, it is crucial
to appreciate how a government can come under pressure to control these
dimensions.

In the next section, we start with a discussion on the politics of policy
definition and formulation. Here we argue that policy is the product of an
ongoing and dynamic process in which policy-makers are not simply 'in
charge' but rather are players in a complex field that needs to be taken into
account. Taking an interpretative approach to policy analysis, we argue that
even in cases of high insecurity - such as El Salvador - 'threat entities' are
'socially constructed'. We discuss the key assumptions of Balzacq's theory of
sociological securitisation concerning the role of audiences, local context and
the political, technical and symbolic functions of policy tools.
In the third section, we start with a brief overview of the anti-gang
policies of the Alianza Republicana Nacionalista (Nationalist Republican
Alliance, ARENA) administrations between 2002 and 2009. This provides the
backdrop to the Funes administration's proposed reforms in security policies.
We argue that, in this period, the gang issue was successfully securitised - that
is, it was defined as an existential threat to the Salvadorean state and society,
152- De-securitising and Re-securitising Gang Policies
requiring extraordinary measures.7 We chen present an analysis of the initial
efforts of the Funes administration to de-securitise the gang phenomenon by
looking for and implementing less repressive ways to deal with it. The bulk of
this section deals with a discussion of the reasons why the government was
quickly caught in a spiral of re-emphasising the security aspect of the gang
phenomenon and defining it again as the main problem facing Salvadorean
society. Subsequently, we discuss and explore how the facilitation of an inter
gang truce can be linked to the overall re-securitisation of gang policies in El
Salvador. We close our argument by briefly exploring the recent multifaceted
security policy of the Funes administration.8

Securitising and De-securitising Gangs
Like all policy-making policy-making about gangs takes place in a complex
social and political environment. Hal Colebatch makes a distinction between
a vertical and a horizontal dimension of policy. The vertical dimension refers
to 'the authorized decisions and the instrumental action, rational choice,
and the force of legitimate authority' (the realm normally associated with
'government policy').9 Conversely, the horizontal dimension is concerned
with the relationships among policy participants in different organisations
outside of the line of hierarchical authority. Both dimensions are relevant
to understanding the policy-making process. Thus, the actual 'making' of
policy is, as Bernard Schaffer argues, a multi-person drama going on in several
arenas.10 In this process, it may be difficult to point to a leading agent: 'It is
hard to identify a point at which policy is actually made; rather we see a
process of framing and reframing.'11

Chris van der Borgh and Wim Savenije 15 3
The importance of framing and reframing is also relevant in cases where
policy-makers are confronted with a situation of crisis. Boin et al. define a
crisis as 'a serious threat to the basic structures or the fundamental values
and norms of a system, which under time pressure and highly uncertain
circumstances necessitates making vital decisions'.12- They argue, however, that
crisis management is not in the first place about coping with a clear external
threat. Rather, it is about the 'deeply controversial and intensely political
activity' of definition and framing.13 Discarding the idea of an ontological
'threat entity', they argue that a crisis is a 'socially construed threat: before we
can speak of a crisis, a considerable number of players must agree that a threat
exists and must be dealt with urgently'.14 Boin et al. distinguish between
several critical tasks of crisis leadership that are related to the ways in which
policy-makers or politicians frame the situation.15 Among other considera
tions, these policy actors need to make sense of the situation (work out what is
going on), to make decisions (allocate and prioritise scarce resources) and to
make 'meaning' (shape the societal and political meaning-making process by
which crises come to be labelled, understood and evaluated).

The contested nature of policy and the important role of framing aemphasised in securitisation theory. This theory focuses on the constructioand definition of certain concerns as 'security issues' - that is, as existentiathreats which call for and legitimise the adoption of extraordinary oemergency measures.'6 This shift from 'regular' policies to extraordinor emergency measures is crucial in securitisation theory. The pioneeof securitisation theory, Buzan, Waver and de Wilde, distinguish betwdifferent phases: the non-political, politicisation and securitisation.17governments assume that there is no need to define a policy on a topthey treat it as 'non-political', irrelevant to state action and public debate.1The issue becomes politicised when 'it requires government decision a

resource allocations'.19 The issue is securitised when extraordinary measures
are called for or taken.10 De-securitisation is the opposite process of reversing
the (call for) extraordinary measures and bringing the issue back into the realm
of normal politics and decision-making.11 Buzan and colleagues argue that
securitisation is first and foremost a discursive process that starts with a
discursive portrayal by a securitising actor (state or non-state) of certain issues,
persons or entities as existential threats to other certain entities (referent
objects). This 'speech act', however, can only be effective when a 'relevant
audience' (such as public opinion, the military or elites) is convinced that the
referent object is truly threatened. Only then can extraordinary measures to
address the threat be legitimately imposed.
The emphasis in the approach of Buzan and colleagues on the 'speech acts'
of securitising actors and the capacity to frame certain issues, persons or
entities as existential threats12 has been questioned by Balzacq. Balzacq argues
that there is a need to 'disaggregate' the audience, making a distinction
between different types of consent, such as 'formal' political consent (of the
judiciary sector, for instance) and the 'moral' consent of, for example, the
public at large.23 Most importantly, Balzacq rejects a strict division of labour
between securitising actors and audiences, arguing that the roles of audience
and securitising actor can also be blurred.24 The communication between
securitising actor and audience is not 'one-way'; audiences can urge or even
pressure for securitisation. Balzacq stresses the possibility of an 'empowering
audience' that has a direct connection with the issue and the ability to enable
or press the securitising actor to adopt measures in order to tackle the threat.
This also implies that government efforts not to securitise an issue, or even to
de-securitise it, can be rejected and resisted by different audiences.
Furthermore Balzacq takes issue with the focus of Buzan and colleagues on
'institutional threats', which assumes that 'security is what language constructs
Chris van der Borgh and Wim Savenije 15 5
and, as a consequence, what is "out there" is thus irrelevant'.15 Contrarily,
Balzacq argues that the external reality does matter, and that the statements of
a securitising actor need to be related to this reality.2-6 Although he makes a
distinction between an 'objective' situation on the ground and the
representations of such a situation, he also argues that there are 'external or
brute threats [that] do not necessarily depend on language mediation to be
what they are: hazards for human life'.17
The assertion that an environment is characterised by real hazards obviously
does not imply that there is consensus about what makes a place dangerous or
what should be done about it. This is clearly the case in El Salvador, a country
characterised by extremely high levels of violence and criminality. However,
perceptions of who is responsible for the insecurity differ greatly (ranging from
street gangs to drug dealers or traffickers and organised crime syndicates).
Differences in perception depend on such factors as geographical location,
socio-economic position and the political stances of agents.18 In the same way,
the construction of an 'institutional' discourse of threat does not reflect an
'objective' reality, but rather emerges in a specific security context. This does
not imply that just any institutional discourse goes. The audience must
perceive a 'match' with their experiences, interpretations and expectations
about who is threatening who and what has to be done about it. In this regard,
Balzacq emphasises that securitisation can best be understood by taking into
account local political histories of how security is conceived and how this is
translated into practice: 'the performative dimension of security sits between
semantic regularity and contextual circumstances'.19
In our discussion of securitisation, de-securitisation and re-securitisation,
we place emphasis on policy measures taken by the Funes government meant
to curb the high levels of insecurity in El Salvador. We ask why and how the
measures aimed at securitising de-securitising and re-securitising the gangs
in El Salvador were taken up, tracing the process of their formulation
while paying attention to the agents that have contributed to or resisted
these moves.30 In particular, we are interested in the interactions between
government (policies) and (the reactions of) gangs. We argue that the security
measures taken do not simply have a technical role; they also have important
political and symbolic functions. Understanding the ways in which these
different functions play out requires an awareness of the particular security
15 6 De-securitising and Re-securitising Gang Policies
context and political junctures in which the policies are adopted. In a
hazardous environment like El Salvador, where the policies dealing with the
gang phenomenon are highly contested, security policies can serve different
purposes at the same time. They can be a response to the perceived problem,
a reply to critiques of being soft on crime, and a message showing that
'something is being done' in a way that is appreciated by the audience.
Gangs and Gang Policies in El Salvador, 2003-2009
Since the mid-1990s, the phenomenon of street gangs has increased in the
Northern Triangle of Central America. The local gangs emerging from
deprived neighbourhoods have mostly joined the ranks of two transnational
gangs that originated in the United States and are sworn enemies: the Mara
Salvatrucha and Barrio 18 (the 18th Street gang).31 The local gangs became
'cliques' or branches of these larger transnational gangs and obey the latter's
codes and rules. Over time, the nature of these gangs has transformed. Most
importantly, their organisation has become more hierarchical and integrated,
while their involvement in criminal activities has 'professionalized'.52 Over the
past decade, the capacity of gang members to extort local businesses and bus
companies crossing their territory has increased. More recently, increased
connections with the growing drug trade have been reported.53 Prisons have
become important places where members from the same gang meet and deal
with each other, and where leadership roles are cemented. The increasing
number of imprisoned gang members has led to a growing 'social base' of
gangs, consisting of local wannabes, family members and friends. Police and
politicians have frequently claimed that the gangs are responsible for a large
part of the homicides in the country, but data is scant and not very reliable.
Yet, even if official statistics published by the PNC often do not confirm the
more extreme claims, the PNC's 2011 estimate that 50 per cent of homicides
are attributed to gangs is very alarming.54

Chris van der Borgh and Wim Savenije 157
In the period after the peace agreements, violence and delinquency soon
became strong preoccupations for Salvadoreans.35 In 1997, Cruz and Gonzalez
stated that the Salvadorean population had become more worried about
criminal violence than they had been about the civil war in the second part of
the 1980s.36 Moreover, public opinion surveys showed that in 1999, 42.6 per
cent of respondents considered 'delinquency, violence and gangs' to be the
principal problem affecting the country. This figure increased to 48.2 per cent
in October 2003, and to 53.3 per cent in 2006.37 However, while much of the
delinquency and violence was attributed to the gangs, there was no serious
gang policy until President Francisco Flores launched his Mano Dura initiative
on 23 July 2003.38 The announcement was made in a neighbourhood that
hosted a strong gang presence. Flores was photographed in front of gang
graffiti and flanked by the chief of police and the minister of defence.39
This was followed by joint police-military operations, arresting hordes of
gang members, and two consecutive temporary anti-gang laws, which made
membership in a street gang punishable with three to six years in prison.40
These measures were preceded by the surge of attention for the gang
phenomenon in El Salvador's leading TV channels and newspapers.41

15 8 De-securitising and Re-securitising Gang Policies
By extensively covering the implementation of the police operations, the media
largely justified the Mano Dura policies and helped to convince the general
public that the government was in control of the gang situation. In this way,
leading (and mostly conservative) media in El Salvador played an important
role in putting the gang problem on the agenda and justifying the responses of
the Salvadorean government. The anti-gang policies also played an important
role in the electoral campaign of the ARENA party and of their candidate,
Antonio Saca, who would become the next president of the country.42
Given the size and complexity of the gang phenomenon, the policy
measures themselves (the media-hyped raids and massive detentions) were
mainly of symbolic importance, and not effective in resolving the gang
problem. Responding to public fears of the gangs and depicting them as 'the
enemy of the good citizen',43 the measures were extremely popular and raised
strong hopes that they could ameliorate the insecurity attributed to the gangs.
A survey of the Institute for Public Opinion of Central American University
in October 2003 (four months after the start of the Plan Mano Dura) found
that 72.5 per cent of the surveyed population agreed strongly with the Plan
Mano Dura, and 5 2.9 per cent thought that it would reduce the delinquency
of the gangs 'to a great extent'.44
Although the public at large supported the securitisation of gangs - in
Balzacq's terms, securitisation had the public's 'moral' consent - the policies
did not convince another important audience. The security measures were
severely criticised by the judiciary for being unconstitutional. Judges refused to
apply a temporary anti-gang law and released gang members if no convincing
evidence was presented of their participation in criminal acts.45 Thus, in the
period until 30 August 2004, of the 19,275 gang-related detentions that took
place, almost 95 per cent were dismissed.46 Moreover, with homicide rates
increasing in 2003, 2004 and 2005 (and with gangs being held responsible by
the public for this increase), the Mano Dura policies obviously did not have
the desired effect.47 On 4 February 2004, the presidential candidate, Antonio
Saca, proposed a new - and supposedly tougher - anti-gang initiative: Super
Mano Dura.48 Although strongly covered by the media once more, this
policy was again mostly symbolic, and neither ended nor mitigated the gang
phenomenon. The Mano Dura policies were mainly securitisation discourses
used for limited periods of time and then quietly scaled back 49 While the
results of these measures were disappointing, they nevertheless led to a steady
increase in the imprisoned gang population, with 8,000 gang members
imprisoned in 2006 (over 30 per cent of the entire prison population).50
It is interesting to note that the Saca government also proposed preventive
and more socially oriented policies that were supposed to complement the
repressive ones. Preceding the implementation of Super Mano Dura policies,
and as a result of strong criticisms from the judiciary, national NGOs
and international organisations, the Saca government organised a round of
dialogue sessions {mesas) with civil society organisations. The objective was,
among other things, to discuss the situation of the street gangs, to formulate
alternatives to the anti-gang law, and to design an integrated prevention
oriented policy.SI However, the formulation and the implementation of these
preventive policies was hotly debated within the government bureaucracy.51
Many officials were convinced that it was necessary to deal with the causes of
gangs and that some kind of an integrated effort was required, but there were
serious obstacles to such an effort materialising. A coherent and integrative
gang policy, thus, never emerged.
Several authors have emphasised that the struggle to address the gang
problem was not only the result of the absence of resources or weak policy
expertise; many also point to structural problems in the Central American
context. In her study about the transnational gang crisis between Los Angeles
and San Salvador, Elena Zilberg argues that the post-peace settlement security
policies in El Salvador should be understood in a context of neoliberal reform
where neoliberal regulation is combined with zero-tolerance strategies against
gangs.53 Dennis Rodgers argues that the violence in Central America is part of
a broader crisis of governance, being the result of economic liberalisation,
incomplete democratisation and intensifying globalisation.54 This very process
has undermined the state's political authority and its ability to command a
monopoly on the use of violence.55 Jenny Pearce goes a step further and
argues that states increasingly build their legitimacy on the basis of a 'lack of
such a monopoly', by securitising certain groups and topics.56 Pearce calls
this 'securitized democracy' and asserts that 'democracy is increasingly
subject to the fears and insecurities of the population, enabling the state
to build its authority not on the protection of citizens' rights but on its
armed encounters and insidious collusions with violent actions in the name of
"security provision'".57
While Pearce's observations about securitised democracy are relevant to
explain the anti-gang policies of the Flores and Saca administrations, the Funes
government clearly sought to move beyond the focus on repressive anti-gang
policies. It tried to place the gang phenomenon within a broader spectrum of
social and security problems - that is, to de-securitise the gang phenomenon.
From a technical perspective, this was a 'rational' ambition. Zero-tolerance
policies, despite their popularity, overlooked the socio-economic contexts of
the gang phenomenon and had not been able to stop the gangs or contain the
violence. On the contrary, the incarceration of hordes of gang members had
contributed to the growing complexity of the phenomenon and had resulted
in an even greater problem to address. However, reversing these policies proved
in practice to be an enormous challenge for the Funes government.
The Funes Administration: Reversing and Returning to Mano Dura Policies
After xo years of uninterrupted rule by the ARENA party, Mauricio Funes, a
well-known journalist and television presenter, was elected president in 2009.
Funes ran as the candidate for the Frente Farabundo Marti para la Liberation
National (Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, FMLN), a party of
a markedly more extreme left-wing persuasion than Funes himself. The
coalition government that was formed included both members of the FMLN
and independent persons. The government started out with the intention to
take a more integrated approach on security issues. The gangs were still seen as
an important security concern, but there was a willingness to 'de-mediatise'
and de-securitise the problem. In previous years, prevention had been
emphasised by international donors and multilateral organisations as a key
ingredient of any anti-gang policy. For the new government, it became the new
buzzword. There was an openness in the government to the idea of seeing gang
members not only as perpetrators of crime but also as victims of broader
structural causes, most notably marginalisation. As well as looking at the gang
problem, the new administration focused the security agenda on issues like
organised crime, drug trafficking and corruption.58 However, extraordinary
measures were not proposed for any of these issues. It is therefore fair to say
that, in the beginning the new government did not seek to securitise these
issues, but opted to bring them into the normal political process.
Yet the formulation and implementation of the new public security policy
was rather slow. A series of policy measures was taken up during the first year
of the new administration, but it took some eight months for the security
cabinet to publish its preliminary strategy for fighting violence and crime in
the country.59 At least three factors can account for this slow process. First,
there was a lack of the institutional capacity and experience needed to
implement the changes that the new government envisaged. As discussed in
the previous section, the security policy of the former governments consisted
mainly of repressive actions, eventually relegating the preventive measures to
the predominantly foreign-financed Consejo National de Seguridad Publica
(Council for National Public Security, CNSP). Secondly, it proved difficult to
coordinate between different departments and agencies within the govern
ment. The government institutions designated to work on prevention had
serious difficulties in agreeing on a common policy and a division of labour.60

Later in 2010, in order to speed up decision-making, the security cabinet was
split in two; one side focused on controlling insecurity, and the other dealt
with prevention. The split was generally seen as a major improvement in terms
of coherence and efficacy of the policies controlling insecurity. Nevertheless, it
still proved difficult for the prevention cabinet to formulate a coherent policy.
Thirdly, the new administration was confronted with a deteriorating security
situation in its first year of administration, as well as ongoing changes within
street gangs, provoked by years of strong-arm, anti-gang policies in the absence
of prevention approaches. The situation was more complicated and alarming
than when the Flores or Saca administrations took office. This increased the
pressure on the government and frustrated efforts to de-escalate its relationship
with the street gangs. Instead of making them the object of normal political
processes, the government was under great pressure to re-securitise the gangs.
In the first year of the new administration, the government showed a greater
willingness than previous governments to cooperate with NGOs and
organisations of gang members' families. A telling example is the experience
of the Fundacion de Estudios para la Aplicacion del Derecho (Foundation for
Studies of the Application of Law, FESPAD), a judicial and left-leaning NGO.
In the years before 2009, FESPAD had started to work with groups of gang
members' families. After sending a letter to the new minister of public security
on behalf of these groups, FESPAD swiftly received an invitation from the
minister to discuss the issue.61 This was indicative of the new government's
openness to working with more critical NGOs, which had previously been
sidelined and even criticised by earlier governments. FESPAD also participated
in a new initiative, the Mesas de la Esperanza (Round Tables of Hope), with
the family members of prisoners, particularly gang members. These meetings
were organised by the Direccion General de Centros Penales (National
Directorate of Prisons) in an effort to discuss and resolve the problems
experienced by the prison population.
In this early period there were also signs that gang leaders would be willing
to discuss ways to diminish gang violence, and to 'talk' about 'reintegration
into civil life'.61 The two major gangs had already shown their ability to
coordinate on particular issues, organising demonstrations and making joint
announcements in newspapers. For instance, in an announcement in the
Diario CoLatino newspaper - supposedly paid for by both the Mara
Salvatrucha and the Barrio 18 - the gangs asked for a process of dialogue
and coordination with the government that should lead to the rehabilitation
and reintegration of gang members into Salvadorean society.6' There are even
rumours that the gangs organised a truce between themselves, between
February and March 2010, in order to demonstrate that they were serious and
capable of acting together and also to deliver on their promises to diminish
violence and reduce homicide numbers.64 This supposed truce coincided with
the attempts of some NGOs to facilitate talks between the gangs and
government representatives. These talks were to deal with the possibilities for
diminishing gang violence and delinquency, ending gang wars, the
reintegration of gang members and support for their families. The initiatives
to start these talks took place in secret. Although the talks did not materialise,
some high-level staff within the administration apparently knew of these
initiatives and were interested in discussing the possibilities for supporting a
process of talks and de-escalation.65 There are also indications that a number
of gang leaders, at least initially, considered the FMLN's presence in the
government to be a change that might offer new opportunities to their family
members and other youth living in the most marginalised neighbourhoods.
The importance of these 'talk' initiatives is not in their ultimate results, but
rather in the fact that there was a process of dialogue-seeking taking place,
albeit a fragile one. It is also telling that these initiatives were 'low-key' and did
not take place openly. Nonetheless, they seem to have evoked the sympathy of
a number of government officials; some such officials even argued in private
that some kind of dialogue (either with groups close to gangs, such as parents'
organisations and NGOs, or even with gang members directly) might be
needed to de-escalate and manage the problem. The secrecy surrounding
these conversations made it clear that such talks implied serious risks for the
government. The Funes administration would have a hard time convincing
the Salvadorean population, both their political opposition and even some of
their own supporters, of the need for 'dialogue' with persons that many
considered to be violent criminals. Talks might easily be labelled as 'soft' and
'morally wrong' by opposition politicians, the media and the public in general.

164 De-securitising and Re-securitising Gang Policies
Therefore, such an approach had the potential to erode government authority
on public security. These risks put serious limits on de-securitisation moves, a
fact of which the Salvadorean government was well aware from the very start.
The need to take bolder measures came by the end of 1009. Confronted
with homicide rates reaching new heights, in October 2009 President Funes
authorised the deployment of 2,500 extra soldiers to help the police in their
struggle to improve security.66 The deployment of the army had a double
function. On the one hand, there was a need to show that the government was
doing something about the exasperating homicide figures. On the other, it had
to rebuke the allegations that it was ineffective and soft on crime. For a
president who needed to establish an image of being in control (regardless of
whether his policies were effective or not), turning to the army was a logical
choice in the Salvadorean context. Despite its committing human rights
abuses during the civil war and the intention of the 1992 peace agreement to
demilitarise political life, the population accepts the historical role of the
Salvadorean army as a force that can restore order.67
This measure is a clear case of the government re-securitising the gang issue.
However, there was hardly a need for explicit 'speech acts' defining the gangs as
a threat to security or justifying the need for extraordinary measures.68 Rather,
the opposite was true; it would have been difficult for the president not to
take these measures. Even NGOs that had been critical of the Mano Dura
policies of previous governments, while not happy with the new measurehardly criticised them in this case.69 In this respect, it is interesting to note
that some government officials were even reluctant to frame the measure as
'extraordinary' and therefore as a securitising move. Instead, they emphasised
the 'technical' aspects - for instance, the need to alleviate the shortage of
police personnel.70 Moreover, President Funes sought to de-emphasise the
policies' securitising nature. Rather, he chose to emphasise the temporary
character of the measures and the need to complement the approach with
long-term policies of prevention and reintegration.71
The one-year prolongation of the army's deployment, in May zoio, was
'applauded' by the public.71 In October 1009, the mandate of the military was
also extended to control of external security and visitors at various prisons.73
Once again, this was not presented as a securitising move; instead, it was
framed as a necessary measure in the face of a thoroughly corrupted prison
system. Prison guards and staff were being bribed by gang members and other
prisoners, letting visitors pass through with forbidden items (like telephones,
drugs and even arms) or bringing these items in themselves. According to
Douglas Moreno, then director of the prison system in El Salvador, the
corruption was of such magnitude - even involving prison medical staff and
teachers - that special measures were needed.74 While the objective of
regaining control over the prisons was itself not contested, the deployment of
the army into the prisons was definitely an extraordinary measure.
The implementation of this plan led to strong criticism by the gangs and
their families, and even to serious threats and violent actions against
representatives of the state (especially the soldiers in charge).75 From the
perspective of the gangs, the army's reinforcement of control over the prisons
threatened their modus operandi inside, their communication with their
'social base' outside and, above all, their control over 'the streets'. The strong
resistance of the gangs to these policies can also be considered an indicator of
the measures' effectiveness. It is not entirely clear whether or how these
measures contributed to weakening the Mesas de la Esperanza or ending the
NGOs' dialogue initiatives. What is clear, however, is that these pressures
affected the gang members' confidence in the government and reduced the
possibilities for meaningful dialogue. On 7 September 2010, in a joint
communique, the Mara Salvatrucha and Barrio 18 complained that they were
excluded from the talks about how to reduce violence and, moreover, that the
Mesas de la Esperanza had not delivered on their promises: 'there are no
vocational workshops, education is poor and there are many terminally-ill
patients in prison who are not being treated correcdy, as they should be'.76
A new blow to the gangs and a key incident in the process of re
securitisation was the adoption of a new anti-gang law. The law was proposed
by President Funes in the wake of a horrific attack by gang members on a bus
in the municipality of Mejicanos. On 20 June 2010, members of the Barrio 18
retaliated against their Mara Salvatrucha rivals by attacking a bus transporting
supposed family members or neighbours of a Mara Salvatrucha-controlled
sector. In the massacre, 14 persons burned to death and 17 were left severely
wounded.77 The incident shocked the nation and was almost immediately
labelled an act of terrorism by the director of the PNC and President Funes.78
Although the Barrio 18 distanced itself from the attack, the media and
political parties called for direct action and the implementation of strong
measures against the gangs.79 Three days after the attack, on 23 June 2010,
President Funes proposed an extraordinary measure: a new law proscribing the
gangs (the Ley Proscripcion de Pandillas). This was similar to prior measures
that previous governments had taken to deal with the gang phenomenon, and
like before, it attained widespread public support. But there were doubts about
whether this measure really could diminish the gang problem. The primary
justification for this legislation, therefore, was not the role it could play in
addressing the gang problem; rather, it was applied as an adequate and
authoritative response to strong public revulsion and the cacophony of
statements on what should be done in the wake of these events.80
Chris van der Borgh and Wirn Savenije 167
The formulation and approval of the anti-gang law took place in July and
August zo 10. It bore some similarities with the proposals presented by
President Francisco Flores in the 2004 debates - on that occasion, however,
the FMLN objected to the laws, whereas this time it supported their
adoption.81 For their part, representatives of the Supreme Court, judges and
the ombudsman expressed their concerns with the new proposals, as they
had on earlier occasions. They questioned, among other things, its necessity
and the feasibility of implementing it.81 Nevertheless, the proposal had
widespread public support, and there was also widespread consensus in the
national assembly, with 78 votes out of 84 in favour of the new law. While the
Salvadorean government publicly still recognised the need to combine
prevention and 'control', the focus of its gang policies had definitely shifted
to the latter. However, days before President Funes adopted the law, there
came an unexpected response from the gangs.
On Monday, 6 September 2010, members of Mara Salvatrucha and Barrio
18 distributed leaflets calling for a 72-hour national public transportation
strike, threatening bus companies with burning of their vehicles if they left
the terminals that day. As a reminder, the same night a bus was burned in
Ilopango, a municipality near San Salvador.85 The declaration was given plenty
of media attention and, although the authorities implemented widespread
security measures, including offering protection to the bus companies, the
majority of bus companies suspended work. On the following evening, the
Mara Salvatrucha and Barrio 18 presented a one-page communique.84 This
was read on television by a Salvadorean-Spanish priest, known as Padre Tono,
who had a long history of working with young people (including gang
members) in the neighbourhood of Mejicanos.
In the statement, the gangs apologised for the inconvenience caused by
the strike and declared that their only objective was to be heard by the
government. They stated their disappointment about the new government
policies and the failure of the Mesas de la Esperanza. The statement also
explicitly asked the president to veto the anti-gang law and suggested a
'transparent dialogue' to find a solution for the violent conflict.85
The response of the government was staunchly negative. President Funes
stated, 'we will not let them blackmail us',86 and the minister of defence, David
Munguia Payes, responded that 'a democratic government like ours,
legitimately elected, cannot negotiate with criminal organisations'.87 The
director of the PNC affirmed, 'we are not disposed to having talks with
criminals'.88 Douglas Moreno, director of the penal system, also stressed that
the Mesas de la Esperanza had by no means been a form of 'negotiation', but
were rather an effort to learn more about the problems experienced by the
prisoners and their family members. He complained that by suggesting that
these were negotiations, the word 'dialogue' would be tainted.89 This shows
how sensitive the idea of a dialogue with the gangs had become.
This was clearly demonstrated in the case of Padre Tono. Although he did
not explicitly support or endorse the strike, and limited himself to reading the
statement, his decision to read the statement was rejected by a broad range of
politicians, opinion-makers and journalists. The reactions were extremely
strong and clearly served to mark the limits of what was acceptable in the face
of the gang phenomenon. The press portrayed him as the 'spokesman of the
gangs'. Government officials reacted strongly to the fact that the statement had
been read aloud by a priest who not only believed that dialogue was a
Chris van der Borgh and Wim Savenije 169
fundamental part of the solution, but also suggested that government officials
had shown interest in talks. There seemed to be a declining tolerance for
empathetic interpretations of the gang phenomenon.
The Funes Administration and the Gang Truce
The first years of the Funes administration thus showed a shift from efforts to
develop a more integrated policy on gangs, to a series of measures that focused
on cracking down on them. These measures were resisted by gangs and even
led to efforts by the gangs to openly pressure the government. In this context,
the sense of security further deteriorated and homicide rates (seen by policy
makers as the key indicator of success) remained extremely high. By the end of
2011 and during the first months of 2.01 2, influential actors like the mass
media and the private business sector, as well as the US government, pressed
strongly for results. The media stepped up pressure with constant reporting on
homicide numbers and violent incidents, and questioning of the Funes
administration's security policies. On 10 November, the national newspaper
El Diario de Hoy opened with a strong statement directed at the government:
'Security is worse under this administration.' Based on the results of a recent
opinion survey, it stated that 'Crime has risen during the Funes
administration' and cited public 'belief that the security plans do not work
and to the contrary, the gangs are getting stronger'.90 The message was clear:
the public at large was becoming anxious.
As a result of these pressures and poor results in the area of security, the
minister of security, Manuel Melgar, decided to resign.91 The person that
replaced him was the minister of defence, retired general David Mungufa
Payes. After his appointment on 22. November 2011, Munguia Payes
announced a 'war on crime' and promised to reduce delinquency by 30 per
cent in a year.92- Two months later, on 23 January 2012, the retired general
Francisco Salinas93 took over as director of the PNC. At the same time, a
new elite anti-gang police unit was formed94 along with a new anti-gang
department at management level.95 These appointments underlined the
intention of the authorities to keep the pressure on the gangs. They were
matched by the explicitly stated commitment to continue the already intense
campaign of arresting and incarcerating gang members, started by the previous
director.96 However, it is fair to say that having former military officers in
these positions was of strong symbolic importance. It conveyed a message of
determination, not only towards the gangs but especially to the population at
large. The relatively high level of trust in the military was used to bolster the
image of a firm and 'capable' state authority.
Against this background of ongoing securitisation, and to the surprise
of many, in March 2011 it came to light that the government had facilitated
a truce between the two principal gangs. As a result of this truce, the
homicide rate fell spectacularly in a few days.97 With the truce still in place at
the end of zo 1 z, the total number of homicides in zo 12 had decreased by
almost 41 per cent.98 After first disavowing the truce, it soon became clear that
the government had endorsed the process and that the newly appointed
minister of justice and public security, Munguia Payes, had played a key role.
The strategy was initiated, approved and controlled by his office.99 However,
acutely aware that the government might be accused of negotiating with
violent criminals, the 'facilitation' was publicly implemented by two close
associates from outside the government: Raul Mijango and Monsignor Fabio
Colindres.100 In itself, the choice of the word 'facilitation' emphasised that the
government wanted to portray a clear distance between itself and the gangs.
The decision to engage a bishop in this process shows that Munguia Payes and
Raul Mijango were aware of the need to convince or at least neutralise
important audiences. As bluntly expressed by a businessman in El Salvador: 'In
the business community in this country there are people that when you put a
priest in front of them, or the Church, part of their brain disconnects, and
they stop asking questions.'101
To reach a truce between the gangs, talks were initiated with long-standing
gang leaders who were imprisoned and isolated in the high-security jail of
Zacatecoluca. The leaders first agreed on the need for a reduction of violence
and on the idea of a cessation of hostilities between the gangs, before jointly
formulating a list of general requests to the Salvadorean authorities.101 Thirty
leaders were then transferred back to common, low-security prisons where the
great majority of the imprisoned gang members served their sentences, to
communicate the agreement and impose it on the rank and file. Thus, while
the Funes administration did not want to get openly immersed in the truce, it
is clear that the gangs not only made promises towards each other, but also
made promises and demands vis-a-vis the government. And in its turn, the
government made gestures towards the gang leaders, among others by relaxing
the prison regimes of some of the leaders.
It should be emphasised, however, that the position of the Salvadorean
government towards the truce was highly ambiguous. The minister of justice
and public security had secretly developed the plan and never intended to
make it public. The main reason that the new minister, Munguia Payes, who
had in public always objected to any type of negotiation or dialogue with
gangs, now turned to this course of action was his desire to decrease the
staggering homicide rates.103 The decision to start talking with the gangs was
truly an emergency measure. It is interesting to note that when Munguia
Payes' involvement was discovered by journalists of the online newspaper
El Faro, it was first explicitly denied by government officials, including the
minister himself. In a press conference, Minister Munguia Payes offered an
extremely weak and unconvincing explanation for the removal of gang leaders
172 De-securitising and Re-securitising Gang Policies
from the high-security prisons.104 After a while, however, he chose to admit
his responsibility and declared himself to be the architect of the whole plan.
The fact that the government's involvement in these talks was initially kept
secret shows the key problem of this strategy: while some types of dialogue
seem to be unavoidable, such a strategy is extremely unpopular among many
relevant audiences and therefore difficult to communicate publicly.
Although president Funes had been informed about this strategy and had
given his support to the minister, he kept a distance from the truce itself. This
led to an ambiguous government position. On the one hand, the minister of
justice and public security acknowledged his role as the main architect of the
truce, while on the other hand, President Funes emphasised that his
government was not willing to negotiate with criminals.105 It is fair to say
that, with the announcement of the truce, a type of two-pronged strategy was
followed. Firstly, the process of re-securitisation got even stronger: the gangs
were portrayed as being a far more important threat to security than was
conceded before. Therefore the authorities implemented even more extraordi
nary measures: the creation of more specialised police forces to deal with the
gangs, and an anti-gang directorate at the PNC. Secondly, the government
introduced a different kind of extraordinary measure: secretly sponsoring and
facilitating a process of dialogue and negotiations between the gangs. Its
principal objective was to diminish the extremely high homicide rate. The two
approaches were closely linked - the continuation of a 'hard hand' strategy
permitted and 'excused' the facilitation of a truce by shielding the admini
stration from the accusation of being soft on crime and giving in to the gangs.
Although the government emphasised that it had not 'negotiated' with the
gangs, the truce clearly created something of a win-win situation for the
government and the 'old' gang leaders. Facing the public's anguish and growing
sense of insecurity, for the Funes administration the principal aim was to reach
a reduction of homicide levels. This, however, was achieved by bringing back to
power the old gang leaders, who after years of isolation in high-security prisons
had lost control over their gangs to the younger generations. By sending these
veteran leaders back to the common prisons, the government not only lifted
their separation and isolation but also handed them back the effective control
over their 'homeboys', both in prison and on the streets.106 The administration
also gave the veteran leaders broad access to the media to explain their vision
and active support of the truce.107 The gangs published various communiques
about their positions and petitions.108 The newly re-empowered leaders seized
the opportunity, communicating and imposing their tregua on the other gang
members. Not complying would be cosdy: truce-breakers would be killed by
their comrades.109
It is fair to say, however, that the lowering of the homicide rates by means
of a gang truce came at a high price. It not only strengthened the position
of the older leaders but also contributed to a situation of growing unity and
organisational strength among the gangs. Meanwhile, the truce did not address
the question of extortion, apparently the main source of income for most
gangs. Above all, implicitly the gang leaders were recognised as important
political actors in the ongoing drama of security policy in El Salvador.
Conclusion
This paper has analysed why the Salvadorean government was clearly
unsuccessful in its efforts to de-securitise gangs. We have shown that, in its
first year, the Funes government emphasised the need for integrated policies to
deal with the issue. Such alternative approaches either called for attention
to the underlying causes of the gang problem through prevention and
rehabilitation policies or called for a more pragmatic approach of dialogue or
even negotiation with the gangs. However, even the idea of talking with gangs
proved extremely unpopular. The Funes government soon decided this was a
no-go approach and returned to hard-handed policy measures similar to those
propagated by the previous governments, though the idea of starting some
kind of dialogue never disappeared completely. When it appeared that the
Salvadorean government had played a role in the gang truce reached in March
2012., however, it once again became clear that this was an extremely sensitive
issue.
In El Salvador, pressure to use hard-handed approaches against gangs is
particularly strong. High levels of insecurity are a reality for many
Salvadoreans, especially those living in marginalised neighbourhoods. Thus,
crime and homicide do not require 'language mediation' to be considered
'a hazard for human life'.110 We have pointed out two factors that eventually
led the Funes administration to abandon its efforts to de-securitise the gangs
and instead to start re-securitising them. The first factor is the reality of gang
violence, extortion and growing control in large parts of poor neighbourhoods.
An endeavour to deal in an effective way with these problems, or at least to
communicate control over them without extraordinary measures, was hardly
feasible. At the same time, the government lacked the means to shore up the
more immediate efforts with integrated and preventive policies that were able
to address the causes of the problem. Secondly, the re-securitisation of the
gang issue was the result of pressures from different audiences. The political
opposition and leading media in the country continuously criticised the
performance of the Salvadorean government and pushed for tougher responses
to the gang problem. The anti-gang measures of the Funes government were
partly a means to respond to these criticisms. They were an attempt to halt
efforts to delegitimise the government's stance on security and to respond to
the demands from large sectors of the Salvadorean population for a tougher
approach to the gang issue. Many Salvadoreans were not only ready for
securitisation, but generally considered it as the only option available for doing
something about the gang threat.
The widespread support for repressive approaches to insecurity went hand
in hand with suspicion about alternative approaches, as the controversy about
the truce showed. We argue that the active support of the minister of justice
and public security for the gang truce should be seen as a new type of
extraordinary measure from the government. While the earlier measures
clearly limited the space of gang members and especially their leaders, the truce
did the opposite; it gave them (some) more space, especially to communicate
with their homeboys and with broader society. While repressive measures were
not difficult to sell to the broader population, the accommodating ones
certainly were. This was indeed one of the key reasons to remain silent on this
policy. When journalists found out that the government had facilitated the
truce, the key protagonists within the government had to come up with an
explanation. While some (like President Funes) remained silent on the issue
and denied their involvement, others (like Minister Munguia Payes) came up
with changing and contradictory explanations. A last-minute effort was made
Chris van der Borgh and Wim Savenije 175
to defend and legitimise the truce by pointing to the need for customised
policies to deal with the extremely high homicide rates. Many key audiences,
however, remained sceptical.
The discussion of changes in the Funes government's anti-gang policies
shows that the securitisation of gangs is a rather messy process involving a
range of stakeholders. In this process, the question is not primarily whether to
securitise or not, but how to securitise. Repressive approaches were clearly
preferred by different audiences in the country, but the discussion about the
optimal type of customised policies continued, and the Funes government was
involved in efforts both to repress gang members and to enrol their support or
involvement in a solution (initially to deal with the gang problem as such, and
later mainly as a way to counter homicide rates). El Salvador shows that the
two options of repression of gangs and (a degree of) cooperation with them do
not necessarily exclude one another, though obviously there can be serious
tensions between the two strategies.
While both repressive and accommodating extraordinary measures may be
unavoidable in the Salvadorean context, especially in the short term, an
important discussion remains as to how to link these to a longer-term,
integrated security policy. We argue that although some policy-makers in the
Funes administration recognised the need for a longer-term vision, in practice
the focus of the administration was on short-term securitisation measures. In
this regard, the challenge of developing an integrated security policy was not
met by the Funes government. The chances that an integrated policy will
materialise any time soon are quite slim given the popularity and
communicative benefits of securitising the gang issue through repressive
policies, the deeply rooted structural problems of exclusion and the limited
experience with integrated approaches.























